## Introduction

1. Understanding the downstream functional consequences of genetic alterations in cancer is important for precision medicine and biomarker identification
2. Previous studies have successfully linked driver gene mutation status to gene expression in tumor samples, across many different driver genes
    - RNA sequencing is a ubiquitous/cheap technology, experimental and computational tools are fairly mature at this point
    - Cancer is a disease of dysregulated pathways; gene expression is a sensible place to look for pathway activity and changes to it (cite?)
3. However, some cancer driver mutations may lead to gene expression changes indirectly
    - IDH1, TET genes (DNA methylation)
    - SETD2 and others (histone marks)
4. In these contexts and others, integrating different data modalities, or combining multiple data modalities, could be more effective than relying solely on gene expression as a functional readout of cancer alterations
    - Alternately, gene expression could capture most relevant signal and other readouts could be redundant or noisy

## Related Work

1. Large, and growing, body of work on predicting mutation status from gene expression in cancer samples
    - Guinney et al. 2014 (Ras/colorectal cancer)
    - Way et al. 2018 (Ras/pan-cancer)
    - Knijnenburg et al. 2018 (TP53/pan-cancer)
    - Way et al. 2020 (top 50 most mutated TCGA genes/pan-cancer)
    - Haan et al. 2020 (phenocopies in many genes/certain TCGA cancer types)
    - Grzadkowski et al. 2020 (limited set of genes, pan-cancer, goal = distinguish between mutations in the same gene using downstream gene expression info)
    - Kang et al. 2020 (PIK3CA/pan-cancer)
    - Li et al. 2020 (Ras/pan-cancer, non-linear models)
2. Methylation also correlates with driver mutation status in some cases
    - Chen et al. 2017 (PLoS Comp Bio)
    - Youn et al. 2018 (BMC Medical Genomics)
    - Both of the above are univariate analyses (e.g. is the given CpG site correlated with driver mutation status), we train a multivariate logistic regression model which considers many CpG sites at once
3. Our study is the first to compare -omics data types as a functional readout (as far as we know)
4. Driver gene prediction (a fairly well-explored topic) is related but distinct
    - Driver prediction typically uses sequence features (e.g. mutation frequency, mutation conservation/recurrence, mutation pathogenicity) and sometimes other data (e.g. gene expression, cite an example) to predict whether or not a particular mutation will act as a cancer driver
    - We are interested in predicting whether or not a mutation is present in a given **sample**. This is useful in that it gives us a systems perspective on the consequences of a given mutation.
        * Not all drivers will have distinct downstream gene expression effects
        * Not all drivers will have enough samples to train an effective classifier
        * Per-sample mutation prediction gives us additional functional information (introduce the example of phenocopy prediction here, this isn't possible with binary driver/not driver labels, you need an additional functional readout)
        * Our approach can also be applied to new datasets (but we're not doing this so don't go into too much depth)
5. Brief discussion of multi-omics prediction problems in cancer/TCGA (maybe this can be left to discussion?)
    - Cancer type prediction, subtype prediction
    - Survival prediction
    - Primary vs. metastatic prediction
    - Differential expression vs. differential methylation

