## Results

### Using diverse data modalities to predict cancer alterations

We collected five different data modalities from cancer samples in the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas, capturing five steps of cellular function that are perturbed by genetic alterations in cancer (Figure {@fig:overview}A).
These included gene expression (RNA-seq data), DNA methylation (27K and 450K Illumina BeadChip arrays), protein abundance (RPPA data), microRNA expression data, and patterns of somatic mutation (mutational signatures).
To link these diverse data modalities to changes in mutation status, we used elastic net logistic regression to predict the presence or absence of mutations in cancer genes, using these readouts as predictive features (Figure {@fig:overview}B).
We evaluated the resulting mutation status classifiers in a pan-cancer setting, preserving the proportions of each of the 33 cancer types in TCGA for 8 train/test splits (4 folds x 2 replicates) in each of 85 cancer genes (Figure {@fig:overview}C).

We sought to compare classifiers against a baseline where mutation labels are permuted (to identify genes whose mutation status correlates strongly with a functional signature in a given data type), and also to compare classifiers trained on true labels across different data types (to identify data types that are more or less predictive of mutations in a given gene).
To account for variation between dataset splits in making these comparisons, we treat classification metrics from the 8 train/test splits as performance distributions, which we compare using _t_-tests.
We summarize performance across all genes in our cancer gene set using a similar approach to a volcano plot, in which each point is a gene.
In our summary plots, the x-axis shows the magnitude of the change in the classification metric between conditions, and the y-axis shows the _p_-value for the associated _t_-test (Figure {@fig:overview}C).

![
**A.** Cancer mutations can perturb cellular function via a variety of cellular processes.
Arrows represent major potential paths of information flow from a somatic mutation in DNA to its resulting cell phenotype; circular arrow represents the ability of certain mutations (e.g. in DNA damage repair genes) to alter somatic mutation patterns.
Note that this does not reflect all possible relationships between cellular processes: for instance, changes in gene expression can lead to changes in somatic mutation rates.
**B.** Predicting presence/absence of somatic alterations in cancer from diverse data modalities.
In this study, we use functional readouts from TCGA as predictive features and the presence or absence of mutation in a given gene as labels.
This reverses the primary direction of information flow shown in Panel A.
**C.** Schematic of evaluation pipeline.
](images/figure_1.png){#fig:overview}

### Selection of cancer-related genes improves predictive signal

As a baseline, we evaluated prediction of mutation status from gene expression data across several different gene sets.
Past work has evaluated mutation prediction for the top 50 most mutated genes in TCGA [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02021-3], and we sought to extend this to a broader list of gene sets.
We compared a set of cancer-related genes (n=85) from Vogelstein et al. 2013 [@doi:10.1126/science.1235122] with an equal number of random genes (n=85) and an equal number of the most mutated genes in TCGA (n=85).
For all gene sets, we used only the set of TCGA samples for which both gene expression and somatic mutation data exists, resulting in a total of 9,074 samples from all 33 cancer types.
This set of samples was further filtered for each target gene to cancer types containing at least 15 mutated samples and at least 5% of samples mutated for that cancer type.
We then evaluated the performance for each target gene in each of the three gene sets.

Genes from the Vogelstein et al. set were more predictable than randomly chosen genes or those selected by total mutation count (Figure {@fig:expression_gene_sets}A).
In total, for a significance threshold of $\alpha = 0.001$, 47/85 genes (55.3%) in the Vogelstein et al. gene set are significantly predictable from gene expression data, compared to 12/85 genes (14.1%) in the random gene set and 15/85 genes (17.6%) in the most mutated gene set.
Of the 12 significantly predictable genes in the random gene set, 9 of them are also in the Vogelstein gene set (highlighted in red in Figure {@fig:expression_gene_sets}B), and of the 15 significantly predictable genes in the most mutated gene set, 9 of them are also in the Vogelstein gene set (highlighted in red in Figure {@fig:expression_gene_sets}C).
Additionally, many of the significant genes in the most mutated gene set are clustered close to the significance threshold (Figure {@fig:expression_gene_sets}C), while the significant genes in the Vogelstein et al. gene set tend to be further from the threshold (Figure {@fig:expression_gene_sets}D, higher AUPR differences and lower _p_-values).
These results suggest that selecting target genes for mutation prediction based on prior knowledge of their involvement in cancer pathways and processes, rather than randomly or based on mutation frequency alone, can improve predictive signal and identify more highly predictable mutations from gene expression data.

![
**A.** Overall distribution of performance across three gene sets, using gene expression (RNA-seq) data to predict mutations.
Each data point represents the mean cross-validated AUPR difference, compared with a baseline model trained on permuted mutation presence/absence labels, for one gene in the given gene set; notches show bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals.
"random" = 85 random genes, "most mutated" = 85 most mutated genes, "Vogelstein et al." = 85 cancer related genes from Vogelstein et al. 2013 gene set.
Significance stars indicate results of Bonferroni-corrected pairwise Wilcoxon tests: \*\*: _p_ < 0.01, \*\*\*: _p_ < 0.001, ns: not statistically significant for a cutoff of _p_ = 0.05.
**B, C, D.** Volcano-like plots showing mutation presence/absence predictive performance for each gene in each of the 3 gene sets.
The _x_-axis shows the difference in mean AUPR compared with a baseline model trained on permuted labels, and the _y_-axis shows _p_-values for a paired _t_-test comparing cross-validated AUPR values within folds.
Points (genes) highlighted in red are overlapping between the Vogelstein gene set and either the random or most mutated gene set.
](images/figure_2.png){#fig:expression_gene_sets width="90%"}

### Gene expression and DNA methylation have similar mutation prediction performance

We compared gene expression with DNA methylation as downstream readouts of the effects of cancer alterations.
In these analyses, we considered both the 27K probe and 450K probe methylation datasets generated for the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas.
We performed this comparison using the cancer-related gene set derived from Vogelstein et al. [@doi:10.1126/science.1235122].
We used samples that had data for each of the data types being compared, including somatic mutation data to generate mutation labels.
This process retained 7,981 samples in the intersection of the expression, 27K methylation, 450K methylation, and mutation datasets, which we used for subsequent analyses.
The most frequent missing data types were somatic mutation data (1,114 samples) and 450K methylation data (1,072 samples) (Figure {@fig:methylation}A).

For most genes, predictions are better than our baseline model where labels are permuted (most values greater than 0 in the box plots), suggesting that there is considerable predictive signal in both expression and methylation datasets across the Vogelstein et al. gene set (Figure {@fig:methylation}B).
Performance distributions are similar for expression and methylation, and aggregate performance is also similar for models using both 8,000 raw features (genes or CpG probes for expression and methylation respectively, selected using mean absolute deviation) or 5,000 principal components.
Both before and after filtering for genes that exceed the significance threshold, gene expression with raw gene features provides a significant performance improvement relative to the methylation datasets (Figure {@fig:methylation}B, C).
This provides evidence that gene expression measurements may be a slightly better predictor of mutation status than DNA methylation, although we observed no significant difference between aggregate performance using 27k methylation and 450k methylation.
Results were similar with PCA-compressed gene expression features or raw CpG probes as predictors (Supplementary Figure {@fig:me_compress_boxes}).

Considering each target gene in the Vogelstein gene set individually, we observed that 42/84 genes significantly outperformed the permuted baseline using gene expression data, as compared to 42/84 genes for 27K methylation and 39/84 genes for 450K methylation (Figure {@fig:methylation}D-F, more information in Supplementary Figure {@fig:methylation_heatmap}).
In most cases, these "well-predicted" genes that outperformed the permuted baseline tended to be similar between data types (Figure {@fig:methylation}D-F; genes in the top right of each plot).
For example, _TP53_, _BRAF_, and _PTEN_ appear in the top right of all 3 plots, suggesting that mutations in these genes have strong gene expression and DNA methylation signatures, and these signatures tend to be preserved across cancer types.

In addition to comparing mutation classifiers trained on different data types to the permuted baseline, we also compared classifiers trained on true labels directly to each other, using a similar methodology (Figure {@fig:methylation}G-H).
We observed that 6/100 genes were significantly more predictable from expression data than 27K methylation data, and 2/100 genes were significantly more predictable from expression data than 450K methylation data.
In both cases, 0/100 genes were significantly more predictable using the methylation data types.
For both comparisons (expression vs. 27K methylation and expression vs. 450K methylation), we observed that the majority of points were clustered around the origin, indicating that the data types appear to confer similar information about mutation status.
In other words, for genes near the origin, matching the gene being studied with the "correct" data modality seems to be unimportant: either mutation status has a strong signature which can be extracted from both expression and DNA methylation data roughly equally, or mutation presence/absence does not have a strong effect on either data modality.

We additionally compared pan-cancer survival prediction performance using principal components derived from each data type; results were comparable across the three data types (Figure {@fig:methylation}I).
The 450K methylation predictor appears to benefit slightly more from higher numbers of PCs than the other data modalities, with performance for gene expression and 27K methylation remaining fairly constant as more PCs were added to the model.
However, all three data types outperform the permuted-labels baseline, and confidence intervals between the best- and worst-performing data types overlap at each PC count, suggesting that similarly to mutation prediction, the three data types have comparable effectiveness for pan-cancer survival prediction.

![
**A.** Count of overlapping samples between gene expression, 27K methylation, 450K methylation, and somatic mutation data used from TCGA.
Only non-zero overlap counts are shown.
**B.** Predictive performance for genes in the Vogelstein et al. gene set, using each of the three data types as predictors.
The gene expression predictor uses the top 8000 gene features by mean absolute deviation, and the methylation predictors use the top 5000 principal components as predictive features.
Significance stars indicate results of Bonferroni-corrected pairwise Wilcoxon tests: \*\*: _p_ < 0.01, \*\*\*: _p_ < 0.001, ns: not statistically significant for a cutoff of _p_ = 0.05.
**C.** Predictive performance for genes where at least one of the considered data types predicts mutation labels significantly better than the permuted baseline.
**D-F.** Predictive performance for each gene in the Vogelstein et al. gene set, for each data type, compared with a baseline model trained on permuted labels.
**G-H.** Predictive performance for each gene in the Vogelstein et al. gene set, comparing gene expression directly to each methylation dataset (with classifiers trained on true labels).
**I.** Pan-cancer survival prediction performance, quantified using c-index relative to a label-permuted baseline on the _y_-axis, for gene expression, 27K methylation, and 450K methylation. The _x_-axis shows results for varying numbers of principal components included for each data type. Models also included covariates for patient age, sample mutation burden, and sample cancer type.

](images/figure_3.png){#fig:methylation width="90%"}

Focusing on several selected genes of interest, we observed that relative classifier performance varies by gene (Figure {@fig:methylation_genes}).
Past work has indicated that mutations in _TP53_ are highly predictable from gene expression data [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076], and we observed that the methylation datasets provided similar predictive performance (Figure {@fig:methylation_genes}A).
Similarly, for _IDH1_ both expression and methylation features result in similar performance, consistent with IDH1's known role in regulating both DNA methylation and gene expression (Figure {@fig:methylation_genes}D) [@doi:10.1038/ng.3457].
Mutations in _KRAS_ and _ERBB2_ (_HER2_) were most predictable from gene expression data, and in both cases the methylation datasets significantly outperformed the baseline as well (Figure {@fig:methylation_genes}B and {@fig:methylation_genes}E).
Gene expression signatures of _ERBB2_ alterations are historically well-studied in breast cancer [@doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1207361], and samples with activating _ERBB2_ mutations have recently been shown to share sensitivities to some small-molecule inhibitors across cancer types [@doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2019.09.001].
These observations are consistent with the pan-cancer _ERBB2_ mutant-associated expression signature that we observed in this study.
_NF1_ mutations were also most predictable from gene expression data, although the gene expression-based _NF1_ mutation classifier did not significantly outperform the baseline with permuted labels at a cutoff of $\alpha = 0.001$ (Figure {@fig:methylation_genes}C).
_SETD2_ is an example of a gene that is more predictable from the methylation datasets than from gene expression, although gene expression with raw gene features significantly outperformed the permuted baseline as well (Figure {@fig:methylation_genes}F).
_SETD2_ is widely mutated across cancer types and affects H3K36 histone methylation most directly, but SETD2-mediated changes in H3K36 methylation have been linked to dysregulation of diverse cellular processes including DNA methylation and RNA splicing [@doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a026468; @doi:10.1007/s00018-017-2517-x].

![
Performance across varying PCA dimensions for specific genes of interest. Dotted lines represent results for "raw" features (8,000 gene features for gene expression data and 8,000 CpG probes for both methylation datasets, selected by largest mean absolute deviation). Error bars and shaded regions show bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Stars in boxes show statistical testing results compared with permuted baseline model: each box refers to the model using the number of PCA components it is over (far right box = models with raw features). \*\*: _p_ < 0.01, \*\*\*: _p_ < 0.001, no stars: not statistically significant for a cutoff of _p_ = 0.05.
](images/figure_4.png){#fig:methylation_genes width="90%"}

### Comparing six different readouts favors expression and DNA methylation

Next, we expanded our comparison to all five functional data modalities (six total readouts, since there are two DNA methylation platforms) available in the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas.
As with previous experiments, we limited our comparison to the set of samples profiled for each readout, resulting in 5,226 samples with data for all readouts.
The data types with the most missing samples were RPPA data (2,215 samples that were missing RPPA data) and 450K methylation (630 samples that were missing 450K methylation data) (Figure {@fig:all_data}A).
Summarized over all genes in the Vogelstein et al. dataset, we observed that gene expression and both methylation datasets tended to produce similar quality predictions, and these were significantly better than the remaining data types (Figure {@fig:all_data}B).
For the set of genes having at least one significant predictor (i.e. "well-predicted" genes), median performance using gene expression was slightly higher than for the methylation data types, although this difference was not statistically significant (Figure {@fig:all_data}C).

On the individual gene level, mutations in 26/75 genes were significantly predictable from RPPA data relative to the permuted baseline, compared to 23/75 genes from microRNA data and 15/75 genes from mutational signatures data (Figure {@fig:all_data}D-F).
For the remaining data types on this smaller set of samples, 35/75 genes outperformed the baseline for gene expression data, 34/75 for 27k methylation, and 31/75 for 450k methylation.
Compared to the methylation experiments (Figure {@fig:methylation}), we observed slightly fewer "well-predicted" genes for the expression and methylation datasets here (likely due to the considerably smaller sample size) but relative performance was comparable (Supplementary Figure {@fig:all_volcano_me}).
Direct comparisons between each added data type and gene expression data showed that RPPA, microRNA and mutational signatures data generally provide similar or worse performance than the remaining data types (Figure {@fig:all_data}G-I).

Performance using RPPA data (Figure {@fig:all_data}G) is notable because of its drastically smaller dimensionality than the other data types (190 proteins, compared to thousands of features for the expression and methylation data types).
This suggests that each protein abundance measurement provides a high information content, although this is by design as the antibody probes used for the TCGA analysis were selected to cover established cancer-related pathways [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.2650].
Mutations that are more predictable using RPPA data include _PIK3R1_ and _MAP2K1_ (Figure {@fig:all_data}G), although neither classifier significantly outperforms the permuted baseline.
Both genes are kinases involved in phosphorylation-mediated signal transduction.
The ability of RPPA technology to quantify protein phosphorylation status may thus provide an advantage in identifying mutations in these genes, relative to the other data types we used that cannot directly measure protein phosphorylation.
Similarly, the scope of the features captured by the mutational signatures data we used is limited to single-base substitution signatures; a broader spectrum of possible signatures is described in previous work [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-1943-3; @doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1913-9] including doublet-substitution signatures, small indel signatures, and signatures of structural variation, but these were not readily available for the TCGA exome sequencing data.
The relatively poor predictive ability of mutational signatures likely stems from a combination of biological and technical factors, as there is no reason to expect that changes in somatic mutation patterns would be directly caused by most cancer driver mutations (excepting, for instance, mutations in genes involved in DNA damage repair and similar processes).

As in the expression/methylation comparison, we compared pan-cancer survival prediction performance between all six readouts, using the top principal components derived from each data type to ensure comparable information content (Figure {@fig:all_data}J).
In this case, RPPA data resulted in comparable prediction to the expression and methylation-derived feature sets, performing slightly better at low numbers of PCs possibly due to its higher information content over a smaller dimensionality.
The microRNA and mutational signatures datasets generally proved ineffective for pan-cancer survival prediction (values near zero in Figure {@fig:all_data}J), although in survival analyses for individual cancer types these data modalities were sometimes effective predictors (Supplementary Figure {@fig:survival_cancer_types}).

![
**A.** Overlap of TCGA samples between data types used in mutation prediction comparisons. Only overlaps with more than 100 samples are shown.
**B.** Overall distribution of performance per data type across 75 genes from Vogelstein et al. gene set.
Each data point represents mean cross-validated AUPR difference, compared with a baseline model trained on permuted labels, for one gene; notches show bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals.
Significance stars indicate results of Bonferroni-corrected pairwise Wilcoxon tests: \*\*: _p_ < 0.01, \*\*\*: _p_ < 0.001, ns: not statistically significant for a cutoff of _p_ = 0.05.
All pairwise tests were run (and corrected for) but only neighboring test results are shown.
**C.** Overall performance distribution per data type for genes where the permuted baseline model is significantly outperformed for one or more data types, resulting in a total of 39 genes.
**D, E, F.** Volcano-like plots showing predictive performance for each gene in the Vogelstein et al. gene set, in each of the added data types (RPPA, microRNA, mutational signatures). The _x_-axis shows the difference in mean AUPR compared with a baseline model trained on permuted labels, and the _y_-axis shows _p_-values for a paired _t_-test comparing cross-validated AUPR values within folds.
**G, H, I.** Volcano-like plots comparing predictive performance between data types for each gene in the Vogelstein et al. gene set. The _x_-axis shows the difference in mean AUPR between gene expression and another data type (positive values = better mean performance using gene expression features), and the _y_-axis shows _p_-values for a paired _t_-test comparing cross-validated AUPR values within folds.
**J.** Pan-cancer survival prediction performance, quantified using c-index relative to a label-permuted baseline on the _y_-axis, for all data types. The _x_-axis shows results for varying numbers of principal components included for each data type. Models also included covariates for patient age, sample mutation burden, and sample cancer type.
](images/figure_5.png){#fig:all_data width="90%"}

When we constructed a heatmap depicting predictive performance for each gene across data types, we found that very few genes tended to be well-predicted exclusively by one or two data types (Figure {@fig:heatmap}).
Of the 39 genes that are well-predicted using at least one data type (blue or red highlighted boxes in Figure {@fig:heatmap}), only three of them are well-predicted exclusively by a single data type, meaning that mutations in the other 37 genes can be predicted effectively using at least two different data sources.
This supports our observation that choosing the "correct" data modality is often unimportant for driver genes with strong functional signatures.
Notable exceptions included _NF1_ (only well-predicted using gene expression data), _SETD2_ (only well-predicted using the two methylation datasets), and _TSC1_ (only well-predicted using gene expression data).
Gene expression provided the best performance in 32/39 genes with at least one significant data type (red highlighted boxes in Figure {@fig:heatmap}), but only 2 of those 32 genes did not have any other significantly predictive data types (_NF1_ and _TSC1_); in the other 23 genes one or more non-expression data types also outperformed the permuted baseline.

![
Heatmap displaying predictive performance for mutations in each of the 75 genes from the Vogelstein et al. gene set, across all 6 TCGA data modalities. Each cell quantifies performance for a target gene, using predictive features derived from a particular data type. Blue highlights indicate that the given data type provides significantly better predictions than the permuted baseline for the given gene; red highlights indicate the same and additionally that the given data type provides statistically equivalent performance to the data type with the best average performance (determined by pairwise _t_-tests with FDR correction).
](images/figure_6.png){#fig:heatmap width="90%"}

### Simple multi-omics baseline provides no performance benefit

We also trained "multi-omics" classifiers to predict mutations in six well-studied and widely mutated driver genes across various cancer types: _EGFR_, _IDH1_, _KRAS_, _PIK3CA_, _SETD2_, and _TP53_.
Each of these genes is well-predicted from several data types in our earlier experiments (Figure {@fig:heatmap}), consistent with having strong pan-cancer driver effects.
For the multi-omics classifiers, we considered all pairwise combinations of the top three performing individual data types (gene expression, 27K methylation, and 450K methylation), in addition to a model using all three data types.
We trained a classifier for multiple data types by concatenating features from the individual data types, then fitting the same elastic net logistic regression model as we used for the single-omics models.
Here, we show results using the top 5000 principal components from each data type as predictive features, to ensure that feature count and scale is comparable among data types; results for raw features are shown in Supplementary Figure {@fig:multi_omics_raw_feats}.

For each of the six target genes, we observed comparable performance between the best single-omics classifier (blue boxes in Figure {@fig:multi_omics}A) and the best multi-omics classifier (orange boxes in Figure {@fig:multi_omics}A).
Across all classifiers and data types, we found varied patterns based on the target gene.
For _IDH1_ and _TP53_ performance is relatively consistent regardless of data type(s), suggesting that baseline performance is high and there is little room for improvement as data is added (Figure {@fig:multi_omics}C, G).
For _EGFR_, _KRAS_, and _PIK3CA_, combining gene expression with methylation data results in statistically equivalent performance to gene expression alone; classifiers trained only on methylation data perform worse (Figure {@fig:multi_omics}B, D, E).
The best classifiers for _SETD2_ use methylation data alone; results are comparable whether 27K methylation or 27K+450K methylation features are used (Figure {@fig:multi_omics}F).
Overall, we saw that combining data types in a relatively simple manner (i.e. by concatenating features from each individual data type) provided little or no improvement in predictive ability over the best individual data type.
This supports our earlier observations of the redundancy of gene expression and methylation data as functional readouts, since our multi-omics classifiers are not in general able to extract gains in predictive performance as more data types are added for this set of cancer drivers.

![
**A.** Comparing the best-performing model (i.e. highest mean AUPR relative to permuted baseline) trained on a single data type against the best "multi-omics" model for each target gene. None of the differences between single-omics and multi-omics models were statistically significant using paired-sample Wilcoxon tests across cross-validation folds, for a threshold of 0.05.
**B-G.** Classifier performance, relative to baseline with permuted labels, for mutation prediction models trained on various combinations of data types. Each panel shows performance for one of the six target genes; box plots show performance distribution over 8 evaluation sets (4 cross-validation folds x 2 replicates).
](images/figure_7.png){#fig:multi_omics width="90%"}
