## Discussion

We carried out a large-scale comparison of data types in the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas as functional readouts of genetic alterations in cancer, integrating results across cancer types and across driver genes.
Overall, we found that gene expression and DNA methylation tend to capture signatures of mutation state equally effectively in most cases.
We recommend focusing on these data types as downstream readouts when designing studies focused on the functional effects of cancer mutations, although results with RPPA data were also promising.
Our multi-omics modeling experiment indicated that the information captured by gene expression and DNA methylation is highly redundant, as added data types resulted in no gain or modest gains in classifier performance.

Comparing mutation status prediction using raw and PCA compressed expression and DNA methylation data, we observed that feature extraction using PCA provided no benefit compared to using raw gene or CpG probe features.
Other studies using DNA methylation array data have found that nonlinear dimension reduction methods, such as variational autoencoders and capsule networks, can be effective for extracting predictive features [@doi:10.1186/s12859-020-3443-8; @doi:10.1101/2020.08.14.251306].
The latter approach is especially interesting because capsule networks and "capsule-like methods" can be constrained to extract features that align with known biology (i.e. that correspond to known disease pathways or CpG site annotations).
This can improve model interpretability as well as predictive performance.
Similar methods have been applied to extract biologically informed features from gene expression data (see, for instance, [@doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2020.09.014; @doi:10.1101/2021.05.25.445604]).
A more comprehensive study of dimension reduction methods in the context of mutation prediction, including the features selected by these methods and their biological relevance and interpretation, would be a beneficial area of future work.

In contrast to many other studies demonstrating the benefits of integrating multiple -omics data types for various cancer-related prediction problems [@doi:10.1038/nrc3721; @doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2015.05.019; @doi:10.1186/s13040-018-0184-6; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btz318; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008878], we found that combining multiple data types to predict mutation status was generally not effective for this problem.
The method we used to integrate different data types by concatenating feature sets (sometimes referred to as "early" data integration, discussed in more detail in [@doi:10.1098/rsif.2015.0571] and [@doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2018.09.012]) is simple and in many cases suboptimal.
Thus, it is possible that more sophisticated data integration methods, such as "intermediate" integration methods that learn a set of features jointly across datasets, would produce improved predictions.
We do not interpret our results as concrete evidence that multi-omics integration is not effective for this problem; rather, we see them as an indication that this is a challenging data integration problem for which further investigation and development of methods is needed.
In addition to the methodological questions, the issue of data integration also has implications for the underlying biology: a more nuanced understanding of when different data readouts provide redundant information, and when they can contribute unique information about cancer pathology and development, could have many translational applications.

One limitation of the current study is that we only evaluated classifiers that were trained on pan-cancer data.
Considering every possible combination of target gene and TCGA cancer type (85 target genes x 33 cancer types x 6 data types) would have drastically increased the computational load and presented a large multiple testing burden.
Alternatively, choosing only a subset of gene/cancer type combinations to study would have biased our results toward known driver gene/cancer type relationships, which we wanted to avoid.
In future work it would be interesting to identify classifiers that perform well in a certain cancer type but not in the pan-cancer context, and to compare these instances across different cancer types.
As a motivating example, other studies have shown that activating mutations in Ras isoforms (_HRAS_, _KRAS_, _NRAS_) tend to have similar effects to one another in thyroid cancer, producing similar gene expression signatures [@doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0031].
However, in multiple myeloma activating _KRAS_ and _NRAS_ mutations produce distinct expression signatures, necessitating separate classifiers [@doi:10.1182/bloodadvances.2019000303].
A high-throughput computational pipeline to identify cases where functional signatures of a particular cancer driver are either concordant or discordant between cancer types could enable new avenues in biomarker identification and drug design.

As with any study relying on observational, cross-sectional data such as the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas, the conclusions that we can draw are limited by the data.
In particular, for any of our "well-predicted" genes (i.e. genes that, when mutated, have strong signatures in one or more data types), we cannot definitively distinguish correlation from causation.
To directly assess the effects of particular mutations on various data modalities, some studies use cell line data from sources such as the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) [@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1186-3].
While this approach could help to isolate the causal effect of a given mutation on a given cell line, cell lines are sometimes an imperfect match for the cancers they are derived from [@doi:10.1038/s41467-019-11415-2].
We are also limited in that we cannot assign timing or clonal status to mutations, or fully characterize intratumor heterogeneity, with certainty from the bulk sequencing data generated by TCGA (although some features of tumor mutational processes over time can be estimated from bulk data, e.g. [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa1408]).
As methods for generating large longitudinal datasets at single-cell resolution mature and scale, we will need to revise the way we think about cellular function and dysregulation in cancer cells, as dynamic and adaptive processes rather than a single representative snapshot of a tumor.
