## Declarations

### Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not applicable

### Consent for publication

Not applicable

### Availability of data and materials

The datasets analyzed during this study were previously published as part of the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas project, and are publicly available from the NIH NCI Genomic Data Commons (GDC) at `https://gdc.cancer.gov/about-data/publications/pancanatlas`. Scripts used to download and preprocess the datasets for this study are available at `https://github.com/greenelab/mpmp/tree/master/00_download_data`.

All analyses were implemented in the Python programming language and are available in the following GitHub repository: [`https://github.com/greenelab/mpmp`](https://github.com/greenelab/mpmp) [@mpmp_code] under the open-source BSD 3-clause license.
Scripts to download large data files from GDC and other sources are located in the `00_download_data` directory.
Scripts to run experiments comparing data modalities used individually are located in the `02_classify_mutations` directory, scripts to run multi-omics experiments are located in the `05_classify_mutations_multimodal` directory, and scripts to run survival prediction experiments are located in the `06_predict_survival` directory.
The Python environment was managed using `conda`, and directions for setting up the environment can be found in the `README.md` file.
Most analyses were run on the HTC CPU cluster at the University of Pittsburgh, except the neural networks which were trained and evaluated on the PMACS LPC GPU cluster at the University of Pennsylvania; scripts for training classifiers both locally for a single gene and on a Slurm cluster to reproduce the analysis of many genes in parallel are provided in the linked GitHub repo.
This manuscript was written using Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128] and is available on GitHub at [`https://github.com/greenelab/mpmp-manuscript`](https://github.com/greenelab/mpmp-manuscript).

### Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

### Funding

This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health's National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) under award R01 HG010067 to CSG and the National Institutes of Health’s National Cancer Institute (NCI) under awards R01 CA237170 to CSG, R01 CA216265 to BCC, and R01 CA253976 to BCC.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

### Authors' contributions

JC: conceptualization, methodology, software, visualization, writing - original draft, writing - review and editing
BCC: methodology, writing - review and editing
MC: methodology, writing - review and editing
CSG: conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, supervision, writing - review and editing

### Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Alexandra Lee, Ariel Hippen, Ben Heil, Milton Pividori, and Natalie Davidson for reviewing the software associated with this work and providing insightful feedback.
This research was supported in part by the University of Pittsburgh Center for Research Computing through the resources provided.
Figure 1 (the schematic of the background and evaluation pipeline) was created using BioRender.com.

